>> I think many people today
don't know what to believe
anymore.
>> People are basically
going to keep on to, uh,
help uncover what
really happened.
>> It felt like something
was watching me.
>> We weren't given
all the information,
we weren't told
the entire story.
>> STEVEN KATES:
Welcome, sky watchers.
Mankind has had a love
affair with the night sky
since the beginning of time.
I would like to share
that love of all
that is in the sky with you.
As an astronomer, I have
searched the night sky
in hopes of gaining a
better understanding of what
the universe is telling
us, from the surface
of the moon to the planets
of the solar system
to the most distant
stars and galaxies.
It is my pleasure to help
educate and entertain
the masses on all these
great mysteries in hopes
that mankind will see our
purpose in the universe
and beyond.
Astronomy and space is
truly the final frontier.
Join me as we explore these
great topics, but above all,
always remember to keep
your eyes to the skies.
>>GEORGE NOORY: Now
isn't that exciting?
That is Doctor
Sky, Steven Kates.
You know, ever since
I was a little boy,
I, too, looked
toward that heavens.
There was nothing more
fascinating for me
than the night sky.
Steven, it's always a
pleasure to talk to you.
>>KATES: George, a pleasure.
Thank you so much for having
me here on "Beyond Belief"
and also, thank you for having
me on your national radio show.
>>NOORY: Always, you
do just a great job
and you provide a great
service to people.
You make looking at
the stars exciting.
>>KATES: Well thank you,
George, for those compliments.
As you saw in the
opening piece, uh,
something that we produced
in our own television studio,
it's so amazing, folks, to look
into the nighttime sky, George,
and we all have those
first recollections
of when we looked at the sky
and-- sad to say, though,
to your entire audience,
as we know, here
in the big light
polluted cities here,
not only around America,
but around the world,
we have less of an
opportunity to see what maybe
our forebearers and
our great grandparents
before us had to see, but
still so much wonderful-- many
wonderful things to see.
>>NOORY: When I'm out
on a lake or the ocean,
or in an area that doesn't
have a big city around it,
you see so many stars up there.
It's absolutely unbelievable.
You can't count them.
>>KATES: And it's amazing,
because a lot of the things
I'm asked to do, George,
in the education role,
is to speak in front
of a lot of the schools
and to the colleges,
and particularly
to the young children.
I do a lot with the inner
city schools, because so many
of them, as we know, do not
have the iPhone, the iPad,
or the opportunity
to ever see that,
and I'm sure, like yourself
and many people who've
watch the sky and continue
to search for these answers,
it's so amazing when you hear
the expressions of people
who look out when you show
them the rings of Saturn,
for instance.
The most amazing thing that
they say is, wow, this is just--
and it kind of is
addictive, don't you think?
>>NOORY: Yeah, absolutely.
I remember growing up as
a boy in Detroit, Steven.
My parents bought me a
three-inch refractor telescope.
Now that means the
mirror is three inches,
it's not a three-inch telescope,
and I was fascinated with that,
and after about a month or
two of looking at the heavens,
I found Jupiter, and I found
four little moons around it.
>>KATES: You did
Galileo's experiment.
>>NOORY: And I found
Saturn and saw the rings,
and I was hooked.
>>KATES: Oh, it's amazing.
>>NOORY: I had to do that.
>>KATES: And that's
what we like to do.
As the role of an
entertainer, trying to be one,
is let the audience
determine that and the people
that we speak in front of, but I
think we see so much in science
today where some people
say, oh, that stuff is just
so mundane or I don't
have an interest, so I'm
trying the very best I can,
as a lot of other good people
are out there, to give us that
inspiration with a little bit--
how do I say it-- you have to be
a little bit of an entertainer
to do that.
And again, I'm grateful
for being on your show,
because of all the great
people that are still searching
for these answers of the
mysteries of the unknown.
>>NOORY: What kind of
competition is out there today?
With video and your smartphone
and everything else.
For young people, are they
interested in astronomy?
>>KATES: They are,
George, and there's
so much-- there's a
wealth of information
out there-- just Google
any of these things.
One of the most
fascinating things, folks,
is to take a look
in the nighttime sky
with one of these
go to telescopes.
So nowadays, people
have a telescope,
they're kind of forced to
learn this thing, which
is astro-- it actually
navigates the sky for you,
so this high technology wasn't
around 20 or 30 years ago,
but with the advent
of the iPhone
and the iPad, all these
apps that are out there.
One in particular
that I love is an app
that's called Exoplanets,
and people can just
simply download it.
And as you know, and as you
talk to the vast audiences
across the planet
number three, the Earth,
we now know that there's
well over 200 more at least
identifiable exoplanets
and maybe 1,000 or more--
>>NOORY: Or billions.
>>KATES: --or billions.
So this particular app,
George, is so phenomenal
because it takes you into a
view, graphically, of what
the whole galaxy, the
Milky Way, looks like,
and you can move
yourself anywhere there,
but it shows you the great
distances that are there.
But to answer your
question completely,
we're just inundated with so
many great technology devices
today that it's an
assist, but I try
to do this just the opposite
in many of my programs.
I go back to the
basic star chart,
just like we had in
National Geographic
when we'd get the paper maps.
I say to people, learn the
nighttime sky the old fashioned
way, because simply this--
if your batteries fail
on high tech, now at
least you can remember,
and people say, and you've
probably heard this,
it takes like 3,000 repetitive
motions to make something
a habit, so if you start
using the simplistic way,
learn the nighttime sky,
because all the people
that call your shows, they
now have an opportunity
to report what they're seeing
instead of saying something
like this, well, the bright
object went from here to there.
Now you're going to know.
>>NOORY: It's like a
kid with a calculator--
ask them to do
arithmetic without it--
>>KATES: Precisely.
>>NOORY: --and they can't.
>>KATES: Exactly.
So we don't want to depend
too much on the technology,
though George, the
answer in completion
is we're so fortunate
to have these tools,
and I think like anything, in
moderation, it's a great thing,
and I'm just proud to be able
to share this with the viewers
today and all the folks
on your radio show.
>>NOORY: How did the
boy of Steven Kates,
how did he become
interested in astronomy?
>>KATES: Very quick
story, George.
I don't really like to
talk a lot about myself,
but this one, I think,
many people can relate to.
When I was seven years of age,
my parents, Bob and Delores,
we lived in the big light
pollution of New York City.
They took us to the top
of an apartment building,
and what happened on this
particular night back in 1966,
George, I remember
the night exactly,
it was November the 16 of 1966.
We were told that there was
going to be this great Leonid
meteor shower that
we still see today,
and in that great
light pollution
that we have in New York City,
my parents basically said,
let's sit it out and
see what we can see.
And we actually
got to see meteors,
but George, for the
rest of the country,
there was probably the
most amazing shower
that morning visible in
the western United States.
How about this, folks-- a half
a million meteors per minute.
>>NOORY: To see, to witness?
>>KATES: Imagine seeing them,
like driving through a blinding
snowstorm, but the
short answer for me
is they encouraged
the education,
and that's obviously the
thing that I try to do.
I never had children,
but I'm saying if I did,
I would certainly
do the same thing,
and I try my best as a non
parent to help children,
but for me, it started
off there in New York.
I was actually a child model
and in television a long time
in my life, and with
that experience I had,
I had a little extra
time, as I would say,
as I traveled around, to
share with a lot of people
my early education in astronomy.
But I actually taught
classes in college,
I taught classes in high school,
I did a lot of adult education
classes, because just like
all of the viewers that
watch the show, they want to
know more about the unknown,
and you can start right
in your own backyard.
>>NOORY: I bet you make it fun.
>>KATES: I try, and thank
you for the compliment.
>>NOORY: What do
people want to see?
What do they ask?
>>KATES: George, the
most impressive thing
is that you have a
gathering of folks,
and what they're going to say
you is-- you know, they're
honest-- and they say, I really
know nothing about the sky.
They want to know
first off, how do
you find the North
Star in the sky,
and it sounds like
it's a very easy thing,
and if like when Jay Leno
did all of his on the street,
you know, the man on the street
interviews, a lot of people
didn't know the answers
to simple questions.
So if you say to people,
can you find the North Star,
or what's the brightest
star in the sky,
you hear repetitively the
North Star-- how incorrect.
What they want to know is
they want to find the north,
they want to understand
how to navigate in the sky,
and I show them a simple
technique, George,
it's real simple.
If you take your thumb and
index finger and extend it out,
that's 15 degrees
against the sky.
So I say, try this
experiment at home,
and it's safe for children
and safe for adults.
Look in the general
direction of north,
and then they say, well, Dr.
Sky, how do you find north,
and a simple little compass
will help you there.
>>NOORY: Until things change.
>>KATES: Exactly, until
things change dynamically.
So once you have that for
the local time-- for the time
being, you now
are looking north,
so you're looking into
the nighttime sky.
From your horizon,
where my thumb would be,
15 degrees is where the index
finger is, so just go up.
If you're looking
in the north, you'd
be seeing the only bright
star in the northern sky,
so from Phoenix, where
I'm hailing from,
the North Star is 32 degrees
high, so George, as you know,
two of these is 30,
and lo and behold,
right above it a few
degrees is the North Star.
So I say to folks,
where would the North
Star be if you were at the
pole, and we get a lot of people
jump in and say, of course,
90 degrees overhead.
But the other things that
they're interested in seeing--
people are so fascinated
with the moon,
and since the 12 humans that
have gone to the surface
of the moon, as we all
know, in the great history,
America's greatest
technology achievement--
>>NOORY: Or more if you
listen to "Coast to Coast."
>>KATES: Oh, yes, there you go.
Well let's not discount that at
all, but as we talk with NASA,
say 12 humans that
we think, of course,
did descend to the
surface of the moon,
people want to know
about the moon,
because it interacts,
as you know, with all
your great guests, the tides
that we're still dependent
upon.
This particular time and
in the years that we're
doing this particular interview,
in this time of season,
we're seeing the
moon come very close,
and we all know they're
called super moons.
They're close
enough to the Earth
that they are just spectacular,
and people want to know that,
and they always ask,
when are we going back?
And I say, I really wish
I knew the answer to that,
but the truth is,
George, I don't
think we're going back
anytime soon, sad to say.
>>NOORY: I agree.
>>KATES: We
see so many nations--
>>NOORY: Another nation will.
>>KATES: I think so.
I mean people look at it and
say the Chinese will probably
do it, and if you
ask those experts,
they'll probably tell you
within the next 10 years,
there will probably be manned--
>>NOORY: Well, we already
won the horse race.
What's so amazing is we
landed there first in 1969.
They're just
starting to catch up.
We were the only country
to have a man on the moon.
Look at us-- here we are
now in 2014-- oh my God,
and they haven't
caught up with us yet.
>>KATES: And now that gap
is shrinking tremendously.
>>NOORY: How did we have that
kind of technology so far back
and they don't have it yet?
>>KATES: It's interesting,
and I don't really
know the good answer to that,
but I think, as one astronaut,
and I never got to
actually speak with him,
but when they had the great
Apollo fire back in January
of '67, Grissom, Chaffee,
and White perished.
Gus Grissom, when asked
in a media environment
for simple interviews,
he said well, they
asked him this question--
they said, well
what does it take
to be an astronaut
and how do you feel
about going to the moon,
and they probably would have
been the first manned mission
to the moon if
they didn't perish.
>>NOORY: That was Apollo 1.
>>KATES: Apollo 1, and
disastrous fire, and people
really don't remember this,
just a horrible oxygen fire.
But what Gus Grissom said,
and he looked the reporters
in the eye and he said
it rather convincingly,
he said, just do good work.
I mean we were just
so polished on getting
this done not only because of
President Kennedy's mandate,
but George, if you think back
to all the great scientists--
Dr. Werner von Braun, his entire
rocket team-- how many people,
when you go to the
Kennedy Space Center
and see that large Saturn
V lying on its side
are not amazed?
1960s, that
technology was there--
the most powerful machine,
ladies and gentleman, that's
ever been produced is the
Saturn V rocket made by mankind.
Amazing.
>>NOORY: I'm told that
our smart phones today
have more computer
power than what
we had in the lunar module.
>>KATES: You are so correct,
and I've heard it this way--
if you go to one of
your $0.99 cent stores
and look at one of the
little pocket calculators,
that, even, a little $0.99
item, this particular spacecraft
had less power.
>>NOORY: Unbelievable.
>>KATES: Totally unbelievable.
>>NOORY: Yet we got to the moon.
So you can only imagine the kind
of technology we have today.
>>KATES: Oh, it's
just incredible.
>>NOORY: You would think it
would be simple to go back.
>>KATES: I would
think so, George,
but obviously politics
is a big thing here.
>>NOORY: And money.
>>KATES: And money,
that's a major thing.
I think we're into it, and
as we listen to your shows,
we hear about a global
meltdown financially,
and it's not
something that I think
is fake-- I mean we all
agree something's going on--
but hopefully, better
minds in the world,
and I would have a little
gripe with NASA thinking,
well, folks, you know,
mining an asteroid may not
necessarily, in my
personal opinion,
be the number primo uno program.
Let us return to the moon, as
Doctor Harrison Schmidt has
said, the former
United States senator.
We know on the
surface of the moon
that there's an incredible
isotope of helium that
lies within the material
on the surface of the moon.
Well, you have to get it
here, but the simple thing
is if we were able to
extrapolate-- or, extract
that and bring it
to the Earth, we
would be able to not
depend on our petro fuels,
and the whole world
would be different,
as you have great guests
on these subjects.
>>NOORY: Maybe one day, we'd
have a 239,000-foot pipe.
>>KATES: See, there you go.
>>NOORY: Right there.
>>KATES: And working 24-7.
To lower-- right,
less dependence
on fossil fuels, which I
think everybody would agree
on, but again,
some of the things
that people are asking
me in the programs--
they want to know
about the moon,
they want to know about life
in the universe and George,
I think it's only fair to
mention this to your viewers.
Probably during my college days,
I was pretty much a skeptic,
and I have to be very honest--
>>NOORY: Skeptic of?
>>KATES: Of the fact of
life in the universe,
because I kind of looked
along the story of the Drake
Equation, about exoplanets and
planets that would possibly
be habitable, and even then,
I believed that there probably
were planets like that, but the
whole concept of the visitation
I had a hard time with.
But I've had a total,
complete turnaround on this,
and it's because
I've interviewed
so many interesting people
in my life that have given me
that open mindedness
that I once thought,
and I'm being candid
with the audience.
I was a little less,
because science, sometimes
what does it do-- it puts
us in these horse blinders
sometimes, and unfortunately,
that kind of academia
I totally look the
other direction.
>>NOORY: Now you're a believer.
>>KATES: Absolutely, and
I mean that sincerely,
because if we look, George,
at the most interesting thing,
this object that was recently
discovered 16 light years away,
this Gliese particular planet--
>>NOORY: Earth-like planet.
>>KATES: Earth-like planet.
If it, indeed, is
as they describe,
in that habitable zone,
where life could--
>>NOORY: What do they
call it, the Goldilocks--
>>KATES: The Goldilocks
area, or the region,
this Goldilocks region is
someplace in the solar system,
universe I should say, for stars
or their local solar system,
where we believe habitation
could occur as if you look
at the way Earth is--
>>NOORY: Water is liquid.
>>KATES: Water, we have minerals
that we think could be fluid,
we have oxygen,
carbon dioxide, but
in this Gliese
particular star that
was 16 light years
away, they're saying
the only problem with that is--
and this is just theoretical
now-- is that the
size of the object
is much larger than
the Earth by five times
and it probably, George, could
be a hot-- not a hot Jupiter,
but a hot Venus, and we know
the horrible temperatures
on the surface of
Venus, so, thus,
life as we know it
may not exist there.
>>NOORY: If you
were to go to Venus,
and it's been a long time
since we've had any probes--
I think the last one
was a Russian one.
>>KATES: The Venera series,
the Veneras to the--
>>NOORY: What does Venus
like under the clouds?
>>KATES: Very
interesting question.
If people go and look
at these different apps,
they see this
scarred planet that
looks like it's
just been pummeled,
but it has more fractures
from molten material,
so if you looked under
the surface of the Earth
and see these images,
you see lots of scrapes,
so the surface of
Venus, basically, it
looks like it's not really
like a tectonic where
you moved continents.
It's as if it bubbled
up and masses were just
sliding violently
against each other.
>>NOORY: Is it solid?
>>KATES: We know it is solid.
It's a terrestrial planet, but
the hard thing about Venus,
and the hard thing
for people to fathom
is, your pressures on
the surface of Venus,
as verified by the
Venera spacecraft,
are well over 15
to 20 atmospheres
on the surface
with a temperature,
George, get a load of this, of
over 900 degrees Fahrenheit--
>>NOORY: Oh, that's hot.
>>KATES: So here's what
probably happened to the Venera.
We can't prove this, but
they stopped communicating.
It would be as if I had a
soda can here, was empty,
and I just came by and I just
violently smashed the soda can
in any direction you want.
That's probably what
happened to the spacecraft,
because it was meant to
handle a high temperature
environment, but not that high
pressure of an environment.
>>NOORY: It just--
>>KATES: It's crazy, and the
reason, the driving force
for all the temperature on
Venus is a very simple thing.
The day on Venus is
longer than its year,
and the planet
rotates backwards.
So Earth rotates west to east.
>>NOORY: It's the only
planet that does that.
>>KATES: Yes, in our solar
system, correct, but here's
the dynamic, and we
can all relate to this.
You know, I'm from Phoenix and
I go out or wherever we're from
or wherever we're watching from.
Just imagine instead of
the sun rising in the east
and going across in
a twelvish-hour day,
the sun on Venus, George,
would rise in the west,
spend some 243 days,
Earth days, moving slowly
across the Venusian
sky, and yet,
that's insane, because
imagine all the burn
that you're getting.
>>NOORY: Oh my gosh.
>>KATES: So it's nothing
but a large pressure cooker.
It's a global
warming gone crazy--
>>NOORY: There's no water there.
>>KATES: None that we know of.
I mean that would
be highly unlikely.
>>NOORY: Mercury, just as bad.
>>KATES: Mercury, kind
of an interesting planet.
It has a temperate zone
between the dark and light
on the planet that some say
has temperatures that oscillate
that could be
considered Earth like,
or Phoenix like, but only
for a short period of time.
But there again, nothing that
we would want for habitation.
I mean let's go the
other direction.
>>NOORY: I wonder why
the astrologers always
say Mercury is in retrograde.
>>KATES: Right, interesting.
I don't necessarily
study astrology as much,
I mean that's not my
area of specialization,
but I can say this
again-- I have
a profound respect for
this, because I believe,
and who am I to say,
it's just speculation,
that all the things that
happen in our universe
happen for a reason.
>>NOORY: I agree.
>>KATES: I think everything
is connected, interconnected.
I believe the more
we learn, the more we
come up to looking at some--
I don't know what it is-- some
say the God force, I don't want
to alienate those that believe
fervently in religion, but
from a scientific perspective,
George, I would say
that, like most people,
common sense-- I believe
some other power or something
is behind the scenes, behind
the curtain, controlling it.
>>NOORY: The puppet
and the puppet master.
>>KATES: Absolutely.
>>NOORY: What fascinates you,
Dr. Sky, the most about space?
>>KATES: George,
I think that if we
look at the length and time
for the distance of objects
in space, if we believe, folks,
that the universe started
some 13 and a half
billion years ago
from this tiny
infinitesimally small speck
and it exploded, that
they say, in my hand,
the size of a grapefruit in
a trillionth of a second.
>>NOORY: I have a difficult
time comprehending that.
>>KATES: Isn't this incredible--
>>NOORY: Yeah.
>>KATES: --that in a
trillionth of a second,
we could see or hold--
>>NOORY: That's crazy.
>>KATES: --everything--
this conversation,
all the things in this studio,
every event, every spoken word,
everything--
>>NOORY: Every star.
>>KATES: Every single
thing happened.
So to me, George, the
most amazing thing
is the whole concept
of how this came to be.
And I believe it did
explode, like the cosmo--
I'm not a cosmologist, but
as the cosmologists say,
the explosion that
continues to move on,
but to answer this
question with specifics,
here's what I would say to you.
What we see, folks, is that
as the universe continues
to expand, you
would expect, just
like if you throw a
pebble into the calm pond
and you see the ripple
effect going outward,
eventually that signal
is going to fade out.
>>NOORY: Fade out.
>>KATES: Well, what do we know?
As we go deeper
out into the cosmos
and deeper out into the
universe as it expands,
I'm waiting, like many,
for the slow down, but no.
>>NOORY: It's not slowing down.
>>KATES: We're having
an acceleration--
>>NOORY: Yeah.
>>KATES: --and nobody
can calculate--
>>NOORY: It's the opposite.
>>KATES: Isn't this amazing?
So to me, that is the most
amazing-- the dark energy
concept.
>>NOORY: And, when you
say it's expanding--
>>KATES: Yes.
>>NOORY: --what's
it expanding into?
>>KATES: That's exactly--
>>NOORY: To me, there's
something on the other end.
>>KATES: Sure, sure.
>>NOORY: I don't understand.
>>KATES: I don't know
it either, George.
Again, I'm not a
cosmologist, but from reading
and interviewing a lot of folks
on my own shows about this,
there is a good school
of thought out there,
and this may be
sounding laughable
to many of the viewers,
that the universe is
a series of, like, sausages,
all linked together.
>>NOORY: Many of them.
>>KATES: Many of these, and
that obviously in the universe,
there's many different
planes-- obviously,
from guests on your show.
We talk about the afterlife,
and what's between.
>>NOORY: Right.
>>KATES: We're probably
not able, as humans,
with our small capacity
brain, to experience these
interdimensional layers,
but what I think,
from reading this, this
is just my opinion,
and you're asking me, that I
believe there's many of these
segmented sausages called
individual universes and that
there's probably
so many of these,
which would even
boggle the mind--
>>NOORY: Oh, boy.
>>KATES: --even more.
>>NOORY: Yes.
>>KATES: So that is
totally phenomenal.
>>NOORY: And they all could have
planets and stars and life--
>>KATES: Absolutely.
>>NOORY: --everything.
>>KATES: And just here,
I mean think of it.
And I share this
with people-- it's
common knowledge-- if you take a
laser and point it at the wall,
the light's traveling
186,282 miles per second.
We know that, but it didn't
come easy to learn that,
but the more important part
of this is as you look,
the light travel is about
11 million miles a minute.
So think about this--
if we had astronauts
on the surface of the moon
and we would communicate,
it would be pretty much
in real time-- hi, George,
how are you on the moon,
1.2 seconds back and forth.
But do Mars, nine or 10
minutes, do Jupiter, 45 minutes,
do Saturn, 74 minutes.
Now that's-- the show
is just starting.
The nearest star,
4.16 light years away.
Now, George, we look at the
other side of our Milky Way,
the spiral-- a hundred
to 150,000 light years--
look how big everything is.
>>NOORY: Those stars
could be gone--
>>KATES: Absolutely.
>>NOORY: --that we're look at.
>>KATES: We're seeing
these flashes of light,
and I tell people, when you
look at the North Star at night,
do this experiment.
It's allegedly 430
light years away.
I'm not smart enough to do the
mental calculation right here
in the studio, but 2014 minus
430, whatever that answer is,
simply the light left then,
and now it's just getting here.
So the year that it left,
let's use that as an example,
you're right.
It might have
changed dynamically,
it may be totally gone, it--
and that's only a small one.
>>NOORY: And we've
changed dramatically
by the time it got here.
>>KATES: Most definitely.
So the time dilation that
Einstein talked about,
the distance of these
objects in space,
this is just a mere
warming up for the program.
Like I mentioned before, my
most prolific thing that I think
is most fascinating is still
looking deep into the cosmos
13 and a half
billion light years.
It boggles the mind.
>>NOORY: You brought us
some graphics, Steve.
>>KATES: I sure did, George.
>>NOORY: Let's take
a look at them.
>>KATES: Absolutely.
>>NOORY: One, of course, is
a binocular type telescope.
What is this?
>>KATES: This is an
important way to start,
and this is one of--
many of the questions
you asked me,
people always ask--
how do I get started
in astronomy.
Simple answer from me, Dr. Sky,
is that a pair of binoculars
is your gateway to the heavens.
Why?
Well, as you can see on your
screen, they're easy to use.
You pick them up and you can
use them for many other events--
sporting events, camping,
whatever you're--
>>NOORY: You just take
it off the tripod, right.
>>KATES: Take it off
the tripod, use it.
But here's the example that I'd
like to leave everybody with.
As you see on the screen,
there's the binoculars.
With that full
screen of the image,
the binocular area will cover
up or zoom into a small area,
say, the size of the binoculars.
If you take a telescope, George,
it would zoom into an area
the size of one of those lenses.
>>NOORY: That's right.
>>KATES: So we want to have
people start off the right way.
Inexpensive-- nobody has an
excuse not to find binoculars.
They're relatively
inexpensive, start that way.
They're fascinating.
>>NOORY: Yeah, I love it.
The next one is--
>>KATES: This is interesting.
As we look--
>>NOORY: Strange looking device.
>>KATES: This is the most
amazing aircraft or space
vehicle combination that
I think I've ever seen,
but the Rutan
brothers are geniuses,
and we're hoping not too
far in the distant future,
SpaceShipOne becomes a real
reality with Richard Branson.
As we see the mother ship, this
is what you and I would go on,
if only I had $250,000 to do it.
>>NOORY: That's right.
That's a heck of a ticket.
>>KATES: It's a heck of a
deal if you can afford it,
but imagine, folks, you're
looking at SpaceShipOne.
Why are we showing this?
Because this is the
gateway for people
who are interested
in knowing that you,
too, one day, can
do the same thing
that Alan Shepard did--
America's first astronaut
in space.
But George, that is just an
amazing piece of technology,
and with our photo team,
the Photorecon.net people,
we're going to be hanging
around this particular area
in the Mojave Desert and also
in New Mexico to watch as many
of these launches, if
we're not able to afford
to go up to be astronauts.
>>NOORY: How's the competition
with privatization?
>>KATES: There is some
competition right now, George,
but I think Richard Branson
has done this the right way,
and I think you're going
to see him become extremely
successful at this
in short order.
I don't know enough about this,
to be honest with your viewers,
but what they're looking
at is the final approvals,
and once they get those--
>>NOORY: He's going.
>>KATES: --I think
they have a backlog.
>>NOORY: Yeah.
>>KATES: So, he's taking
his family up first.
I guess the only thing
people probably want to know
is what does it take
to be an astronaut?
Not the "Right Stuff" stuff.
If you go up, allegedly, above
the Earth about 61 or 62 miles,
you qualify to be in space.
You're in space, and
weightless we would be,
and wouldn't that be fun?
>>NOORY: What a great way,
though, to get from Los Angeles
to New York.
>>KATES: Oh, yeah,
that would be awesome.
>>NOORY: Twenty minutes.
>>KATES: Exactly.
Don't be late.
>>NOORY: I would love that.
>>NOORY: A flat
map of the planet.
>>KATES: Well, there's
another reason behind this.
If you look at all the
areas on the screen,
and viewers are seeing
this, the areas that are
lit up in green and yellow and
all white-- light pollution.
This is our big nemesis.
>>NOORY: These are big cities?
>>KATES: These are major cities.
If you look across the eastern
part of the United States,
it's not really that
definitive line,
I think that's a
spacecraft line,
but the point is look at
the world as we see it.
All those areas that
light up the continents--
it's great to have lighting,
George, but like I say
in my local Phoenix
environment, I'm
blinded by the light when
I drive down the freeway
and I see these incredibly
bright, big signs.
Great technology, but
every one of those
degrades your sky
and my sky, and I
think we can have a common
balance between the two of--
>>NOORY: Well, I
think the only way
is to go somewhere where
you can really see.
>>KATES: This is true.
>>NOORY: Yeah.
Let's go to the next one.
>>KATES: Absolutely.
>>NOORY: Let's see
what we've got there.
>>KATES: Well, George, we're
in solar activity season,
as you report on the
show all the time.
This is so fascinating.
What viewers are seeing
is an image of the sun,
and around it, you're
seeing an immense, big
what we call coronal
mass ejection.
And not to get too complicated
on the show, but simply
the dynamics of the sun-- it's
a beau-- a big ball of fusion
power.
It's converting four million
tons of hydrogen into--
>>NOORY: All the time?
>>KATES: All the time,
and it's so amazing.
Imagine our local
electric fuel bill
if we had to pay this--
totally astronomical--
but the driving force is fusion
energy, hydrogen to helium,
the loss of material
is the energy created.
But now, as we see
on the screen here,
this large puff of white
that goes around the sun
is the material that
the sun belches.
And going back into history, we
all know the great Carrington
Event that in--
>>NOORY: Eighteen hundreds.
>>KATES: --and in that
time, which is so amazing,
can you imagine today
the proliferation
of all these electronic devices?
Then, it was reported, that
telephone wires went on fire,
ablaze.
>>NOORY: That's exactly right.
>>KATES: Could you imagine
if we got the kill shot?
>>NOORY: We'd be fried today.
>>KATES: Totally.
>>NOORY: We have
talked about X flares.
>>KATES: Yes.
>>NOORY: I am taking up a
personal campaign on "Coast
to Coast" radio--
>>KATES: Yes?
>>NOORY: --to try
to get Congress
to pass a law to
insulate the power grid.
>>KATES: You know, George,
I commend you on that.
>>NOORY: That's
what I want to do.
>>KATES: I mean then it gets
into the political story,
because obviously what
happens if we had a big EMP
attack, too?
So we need to insulate.
>>NOORY: Same thing.
>>KATES: Very good, my friend.
I salute you.
>>NOORY: I want the individual
states to act on their own,
but I also want the federal
government to step in
and do something, too.
>>KATES: George, you've
got a foot soldier here.
>>NOORY: Because we're
going to save the planet--
>>KATES: You bet.
>>NOORY: --and this
country if we can do this.
>>KATES: I consider that--
>>NOORY: It's not a
matter of if, it's
a matter of when one
of those two scenarios
is going to occur.
>>KATES: Well, George, you've
got a foot soldier sitting
right across from
you in the studio.
I'd be more than happy
to carry the message.
>>NOORY: You can
be my spokesperson.
>>KATES: Well, we can talk.
>>NOORY: Here's our next
graphic, our last one.
>>KATES: It goes to the
origins of the space program,
as people can see
on the screen--
the Redstone rocket with
the Mercury capsule.
How amazing to know
that we, as a nation,
put these particular
astronauts into orbit, though,
albeit not the first.
I mean obviously, political
tensions for younger viewers--
they may not understand
that at this time in history
in America, there was
great political tensions.
The Russians, of course, put
a man into space before us,
but not too far after
that, we did it.
It's a salute to
the great astronauts
of the Mercury Program-- the
most amazing times, I think,
in America's space program.
>>NOORY: How did the Russians,
the Soviets at the time,
lose the momentum that they had?
>>KATES: It's
interesting, George.
My only answer to this is
political change in Russia.
Khrushchev, as we know,
it seems like they
purge all these different
leaders every so often,
and I'm saying it with a--
>>NOORY: Except now.
>>KATES: --smile.
Right, except for now.
In the past, they purged
these political leaders
in violent overthrows,
but I think
what happened is the Soviet
Union at the time had
this great impetus
like the United States
to go to the moon.
They had great scientists, they
have a great delivery system,
so I think the timing was
right-- their politics,
their mission.
Obviously they weren't
doing it just to amuse us.
They were doing it for
military superiority,
and they admit that,
and when they launched,
of course, Yuri Gagarin,
on his first flight,
people need to understand it was
dynamically different than what
Alan Shepard did, because
this particular start
of the Russian space
program went off course,
we also saw, even
before that time.
A 184-pound sphere of stainless
steel running around the Earth,
known as Sputnik 1, folks--
>>NOORY: Scared the
daylights out of us.
>>KATES: Scared the
bejeebers out of people,
because now they knew,
as we all know now,
you looked up in the
night sky and oh my gosh,
that's over American territory--
>>NOORY: And it's not ours.
>>KATES: Psychological warfare.
>>NOORY: Yeah, absolutely.
Steven, if people
want more information
on Dr. Sky, what do they do?
>>KATES: Simply I'd be happy
to answer your emails--
it's doctorsky@cox.net.
Doctorsky@cox.net, and simply
go to drsky.com, and also
our photo and aviation
website, photorecon.net,
where we talk about
America's military, the air
crews from the Blue Angels.
We go to air shows
and we kind of
cover that as participants in
the great story of air races
like the Reno Air
Races and so much more.
>>NOORY: On our next
edition of "Beyond Belief,"
Dr. Sky will talk about the
American space program--
where does it stand today and
where will it be tomorrow?
I'm George Noory and
thank you for watching
this edition of "Beyond Belief."